since the October 7th attack Israel's
leaders have invoked the historical
persecution of the Jewish people to
justify Israel's ongoing Siege of Gaza
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu called hamas's Massacre quote
the worst act of anti-Semitic violence
since the Holocaust and said that just
as the world United to defeat the Nazis
it must also Stand United behind Israel
to defeat Hamas but as the death toll in
Gaza continues to rise and some experts
warn of a potential genocide critics
have started questioning this framing
are Jewish history and anti-Semitism
being weaponized as some within the
Jewish Community claimed that discussion
is coming up in an upfront
special joining us to discuss this is
omad bartov an Israeli American
professor of Holocaust and genocide
studies at Brown University Stephanie
Fox executive director of Jewish voice
for peace and Omar badar political
analyst and commentator and former
deputy director of the Arab American
Institute thank you all so much for
joining me uh Omar I'm going to start
with you uh following hamas's attack uh
both Israeli and Western officials have
repeatedly invoked Israel's right to
defend itself US President Biden's
anti-Semitism Envoy Deborah lipat went
further saying quote no one has the
right to tell Israel how to defend
itself but Israel's response has had
devastating humanitarian consequences
states have the right to defend
themselves within the limits of
international law uh but they also have
to consider proportionality uh where is
the line between Israel's right to
defense and the toll that it's taking on
the Palestinian people Mark I'll take it
a step back and say even before we get
to the question of proportionality is to
remember that Israel is an occupying
force in Gaza Gaza has been placed under
siege by Israel for more than 17 years
in which life in Gaza is miserable
people there was no economy to speak of
half the population is unemployed um
most most of the water that is in Gaza
is undrinkable and they don't have the
right to have an airport or a Seaport or
trade with the outside world that is the
reality for Gaza and successive Israeli
military operations in Gaza have killed
literally thousands of innocent people
including hundreds of children more than
300 children in 20089 more than 550
children in 2014 and so when we ask the
question of the right to self-defense
the most obvious question that should
come up is do Palestinians have the
right to self-defense and as an occupied
people who are living under a brutal
military occupation there's no question
that they do but obviously nobody thinks
that hamas's attack which included
tremendous harm to Israeli civilians
that anybody could consider that to be
an act of self-defense similarly let me
ask a question about that because there
are people particularly is Israeli
Advocates who would say fine the West
Bank is occupied but Israel moved all
the troops settlers left in 2006
uh this is hamas's issue if there's if
there's violence in Gaza if there's a
problem in Gaza it's not Israel's
occupation it's it's it's it's Hamas
what do you say to those people look
ending an occupation of a place does not
just mean taking settlers out because
Israel is literally in control of
everything that goes in in and out of
the Gaza Strip because they're not
allowed to function or have access to
the outside world without Israeli
permission nothing goes into Gaza
without Israel's permission nothing
leaves Gaza without Israel's permission
and again there is you know if if it's
if you're talking about Israel
controlling its own border or Egypt
controlling its own border that's one
thing but when you say Gaza is not
allowed to have an airport and Gaza is
not allowed to have a Seaport that the
last time a humanitarian ship tried to
come into Gaza to deliver some Aid
Israeli soldiers boarded that ship and
killed nine people on board including an
American citizen you can't pretend that
Gaza is a free place that is up for the
people who live in it uh to determine
its future because it is under
occupation and that's the reason why the
UN and many other human rights
organizations also considered Gaza to
continue to be under Israeli occupation
Stephanie let me bring you in here many
have pointed out that October 7th was
the most lethal attack on Jewish people
since the Holocaust one which as the
writer uh Adam shatz put it triggered
the rawest part of Jews psyche the fear
of
annihilation can you help us understand
the psychological impact of hamas's
attack listen every single one of the
1200 Israelis murdered by Hamas that
over 200 kidnapped are precious and
sacred you know on a human level and as
a Jew with loved ones directly harmed I
of course understand the desire to feel
like the clock has to stop to feel
engulfed with the pain and horror of
what are obvious atrocities and war
crimes but I think that um when you
speak about that sort of sense of
triggering a a core and sort of Primal
Jewish fear of
annihilation um that's not um a new
Dynamic for us to be talking about in
the context of the Israeli government or
its oppression of Palestinians right we
have to understand the ways in which um
the Israeli government from its outset
has been set on abusing the history of
Jewish suffering and using it to justify
more and more oppression and
dispossession of Palestinians and we've
been taught as Jews that Palestinians
are somehow the rightful inheritors of
the blame for genocidal European
Christian anti-Semitism and the
Holocaust while never deemed worthy of
their own and that the basic fundamental
longing Palestinians have for freedom in
their own homes for survival in their
own indigenous lands is falsely
represented as rooted in hatred for Jews
instead of love for family love for
Community love for the land to which
they belong you know and so I think that
in this moment we see a Twining and
intertwining of Jewish trauma and
Palestinian trauma that we have to start
um understanding both the way that that
history has been twined and intertwined
the way it's been pitted against each
other and our responsibility to look at
both the nakba and European
responsibility for the Holocaust at once
Omare you're an expert on uh genocide
and you have talked about your concerns
regarding the response of Israeli
leadership to October 7th uh you said
that they're showing quote genocidal
intent which can easily tip into
genocidal action you pointed to the fact
that on October 28th prime minister
Netanyahu said quote you must remember
what amalec did to you this of course is
a reference to a Torah passage uh where
after a surprise attack God commands the
Jewish people to kill every man woman
and infant that's a story where failing
to eradicate the enemy nearly leads to a
Jewish genocide side that is to say the
least provocative rhetoric what do you
make of it what concerns you about it um
Let me let me start just by saying that
the Hamas attack on October 7th uh was a
horrendous attack that could easily U be
defined as a crime against humanity and
as a war crime um and the question you
asked earlier about self-defense I think
every state uh has a right and often a
duty for self-defense so the the
question is obviously the framing of it
as Omar said but um there there is
actually an issue of uh a major attack
in which U over 900 civilians were
killed as well as 300 soldiers often in
atrocious way so that is one part that
that we have to keep in mind and the
sense of insecurity that is it has
instilled in the entire community
community in Israel and the rhetoric
that has come from Israeli political
leaders you've you've mentioned netan
the there many others as well as some
military leaders has Echoes of genocide
it it it actually sounds like an intent
to carry out genocide now the question
is whether they're actually doing it and
we can go into greater detail my my
sense is that the is huge
disproportionality between the military
goals that Israel wants to achieve which
is to destroy at least the military
infrastructure of Hamas and the number
of civilians that it has killed
including uh it seems thousands of
children so on a far larger scale than
ever before uh so there's indication of
war crimes there's indication of crimes
against humanity whether there is a um
genocide I think we have not reached
that point but one thing has to be
pointed out is that Israel has uh
forcibly evacuated about a million
Palestinian citizens from the northern
Gaza Strip to the southern G strip it
claims to do that to protect them from
military action but the result is that
you have now huge congestion of people
without appropriate infrastructure and
just as winter is setting in uh that can
be seen as ethnic cleansing which often
in the past in several cases Wy
cleansing has actually led to genocide
so this is what we have to watch out for
uh and warn against and that's what I've
been trying to do for me as a Jew and I
think for many of us the
dehumanization of the language and the
actions and the idea that nearly 5,000
Palestinian children have been murdered
mured in a month many more hundreds
maybe thousands stuck under the rubble
dying slowly while those who are
dropping the bombs are talking about how
these are human animals that is like at
talk about triggering a core Jewish
understanding of what is what is the
purpose of deeply dehumanizing language
um so many of us in the Jewish Community
who take the exact opposite lesson from
histories of Oppression are pouring into
the movement demanding a ceasefire
demanding an end to the root causes of
all of this violence um because we feel
absolutely compelled to say you know
never again is right now since October
7th Israel said we're trying to get rid
of Hamas fully but an internal
government document uncovered by a
Hebrew Outlet shows that as early as
October
13th the Israeli government was already
considering expelling gaza's population
into the Sinai desert saying that doing
so would yield quote long-term strategic
outcomes for Israel one Israeli Think
Tank said that following October 7th
there was quote a unique and rare
opportunity to evacuate the entire Gaza
Strip what do the past six weeks tell us
about Israel's actual motivations here
look there's no question that the
fantasy in Israeli politicians Minds is
to drive all Palestinians out of Gaza
they've always looked at Gaza as a
problem that they don't know how to deal
with and if they sustain the current
level of Destruction and damage that is
taking place all over the Gaza Strip to
the point where it can literally no
longer sustain life you may end up in a
situation in which to literally save the
lives of people who are currently in
Gaza that you end up forcing them to
basically leave in order to set up a
quote unquote temporary living situation
elsewhere and then prevent them from
returning Stephanie you talked about
context before getting at some of the
root causes uh that got us to October
7th that created these conditions uh
other people have done that and they
haven't gotten a great response I mean
the Israeli government government was
Furious after un Secretary General
Antonio gutterz said that uh the attacks
by Hamas did not happen in a vacuum the
Palestinian people have been subjected
to 56 years of suffocating occupation
with some Israeli officials actually
accusing gutterz of Defending Hamas
activists expressing solidarity with
Palestinians have similarly been accused
of Defending Hamas despite the fact that
only a small minority have actually uh
voiced support for the group and many
including your group have been accused
of having a pramas sentiment uh for
asking to consider again the system of
violence to borrow your words uh that
led us to October 7th what's happening
here how are these messages somehow
being conflated with support for Hamas
you know it's critical that we
understand that for Palestinians October
6th October 5th October 4th and every
day for the last 75 years have been a
day of great emergency and violence
that in the time even just in this past
year between January 1st and October 7th
Israel had killed 250 Palestinians
including nearly 50 children pograms
were so frequent in the West Bank that
we as an organization were having a hard
time responding quickly enough the
Israeli military had bombed Janine
refugee camp like we you know I've done
this work for 15 years and I have never
in my life been in a state of such
emergency over the past year of just
constant horrifying Violence by the
Israeli state by the Israeli military by
settlers working lock in lock step with
those forces to attack or oppress and
violently um harm and kill Palestinians
and so it's outrageous to to suggest
that the mere mention of those causes
and the mere attempt to uh end violence
is in fact somehow um anti-semitic or
somehow disregarding of our deep care
for jewi Jewish life Omare Israel's un
Ambassador uh gilad erdan has repeatedly
worn a yellow star of David like those
that Jews were forced to wear during the
Holocaust he's warned them to meetings
at the UN Security Council uh but many
say that comparing modern day Israel
with the plight of Jews and Nazi Germany
is actually a false analogy how do you
make sense of those kind of competing
narratives well you know shortly before
the Hamas attack uh there was a pgam and
that pgam was in hu in in a Palestinian
town in the West Bank and it more or
less was according to how you define a
pgam that is that there is a mob that
attacks a minority population in a in in
a certain territory and this is what
happened in the late 19th century and
early 20th century to Jewish communities
in Ukraine and Russia uh then when the
Hamas attack happened then much of the
Israeli media called that a program uh
and that was meant really to evoke those
memories and to say well you see now we
are experiencing what we have always
experienced it's anti-semitic it's an
anti-semitic attack and there's nothing
you can do against anti-Semitism but to
fight it that you can't talk with
anti-semites now of course it was not a
pgam because a pgam is an attack on a
minority and in this case the the whole
point of Zionism the whole point of
creating a jewi state was in response to
pgam so the Jews would have as as anism
saw it a Jewish majority state where the
Army would be Jewish the police would be
Jewish the government would be Jewish
and therefore there would not be any pgs
so calling the the the attack of Hamas
which was an atrocious terrorist attack
uh AOG is basically flipping things
around uh it's like calling 911 a pgam
it was a terrorist attack not a pgam the
same thing happens with genocide I mean
I've heard people claiming that the the
Hamas attack was a genocide and now um
many people marching uh in many cities
saying that there's a genocide in Gaza
there have been genocidal statements
showing intent and when you define
genocide you have to uh show an intent
to destroy a group as such so intent is
actually been shown through these
statements whether that is actually
happening on the ground that is whether
there is intentional targeting of
Civilian population rather than
indiscriminate bombing that brings about
the killing of large numbers of people
of civilians of innocent civilians um
that has to be debated I'm not sure that
is the case as I said I think clearly
there are war crimes happening
potentially crimes against humanity
whether it rises to the definition of
genocide I'm not sure but I don't think
in that sense it math is a great deal
Omar look at least we agree that
genocidal intent has been expressed now
let's look at the actions and what they
actually show you have a situation in
which Amnesty International put out a
report saying that entire families are
being wiped out entire Bloodlines
multiple generations of the same family
have been obliterated off the face of
the Earth and when you look at the
history of how many children are killed
in different conflicts you look at what
happened in Ukraine about five just
under 500 children were killed in
Ukraine in the entire first year of
Russia's war in Ukraine and what
everybody acknowledges included war
crimes and massive indiscriminate
bombing of of Ukrainian areas and when
you look at what's happening in Gaza 136
children are being killed every single
day you are looking at a ratio of more
than 100 to1 compared to almost any
conflict that has happened in recent
memory those numbers are absolutely
horrifying and the extent to which half
the house housing units in all of Gaza
have been either completely destroyed or
damaged you are looking at a scale of
Destruction that if it is not stopped
will make Gaza unfit for human living so
the question for me is whether you call
this a genocide or not will depend on
whether you stop it in time or not
however it is absolutely genocidal
violence that is currently taking place
that if it's allowed to continue you are
going to completely destroy Palestinians
ability to live in Gaza step uh
anti-semitic attacks have risen in
recent years and since October 7th we've
seen uh a number of disturbing assaults
on Jewish people uh there was a stabbing
of a Jewish woman in in leyon there was
a dagistan mob storming an airport in
search of Jews uh at the same time many
have characterized CS for a ceasefire as
anti-semitic and have accused Jewish
organizations like uh jvp Jewish voice
for peace of being anti-semitic um in
recent years organizations around the
world have adopted the
I's definition that's the international
Holocaust remembrance alliance's
definition of uh anti-Semitism which
deems speech against the state of Israel
as anti-semitic a hola scholar Amos
Goldberg calls the IH definition
catastrophic and says that the Israeli
right has used it to completely change
the discourse I want to get your take on
this also omire uh what does that mean
well it's how we have this truly
orwellian World in which a March has
happened this week that's supposing to
be up against anti-Semitism but is
actually a proar rally that is headlined
by the one of the most powerful
anti-semites in the US Pastor John heggy
who has said that God brought Hitler to
punish Jews and to drive them into
Israel and has been working for decades
to bring about what he hopes will be a
world-ending apocalyptic religious war
in the land you know it's how we have
Marjorie Taylor green of Jewish space
laser Fame of all things um starting the
ball rolling on what would become the
shameful censure of our only Palestinian
American member of Congress Rashida
Talib for fighting for the lives and
rights of Palestinians and Israelis in
equal measure you know so we have
organizations like the Anti-Defamation
League shutting down anti-apartheid
student organizing in the name of Jewish
safety is insane you know we see them
actually collecting they're understood
as somehow to be the the data collectors
about anti-Semitism in the world but
using that IH definition and using their
own um slanderous definitions they
actually um are collecting the the
incidence of the largest Jewish protests
in decades that are here fighting for a
ceasefire for peace um they're they're
documenting those as incidents of
anti-Semitism so we have this upside
down funhouse mirror situation of
intentional confusion about what antiem
semitism really is and that is
incredibly dangerous in a moment when
white nationalism and and and um
anti-semitic ideologies are are driving
violence against Jews and against
Muslims and people of color it's
essential that we be clear on what
anti-Semitism is and on what it's not
and that our movements are fighting for
a future of freedom and safety for all
people want to jump in I'm going to give
you a chance to jump in just want to
piggy back on one thing that Stephanie
was saying that I think is really really
telling whenever Israel starts
committing war crimes there is also
arising anti-semitic attacks and it is
baffling that leading organizations
rather than distance themselves from
these war crimes insist that these war
crimes are speaking in the name of the
Jewish people that is just lunacy it
tells you that they are less interested
in combating anti-Semitism and they are
more interested in running interference
for promoting Israeli policy
anti-Semitism is a very serious and
Rising problem in this country and to
play with it these silly political games
and to water down that charge by
flinging it at people who are trying to
defend human rights and stand up to war
crimes I think is is incredibly
dangerous om so you know two Israeli
professors Amos Goldberg whom you
mentioned and Alon Kino uh and then
myself joining them um actually uh
responded to the IRA definition that has
been um used by the Israeli government
um created a separate definition the the
the Jerusalem Declaration on on
anti-Semitism that removes those
sections that try to say that any uh
criticism of the state of Israel is
anti-Semitic but the IRA definition has
been successful in being adopted by many
governments um including quite a number
of European governments and it is a
weaponization by the Israeli government
of anti-Semitism in order to uh defend
itself from any criticism of its own
policies you know I'm a historian so
what I find most ironic about it is that
the state of Israel was created as a
response to anti-Semitism it was
supposed to be the state in which Jews
would be protected from anti-Semitism
and anti-semitic attacks on Jews uh
would would no longer have any rationale
to them and the result right now is that
just as Israel right now is the most
dangerous place for Jews in the world
it's also the the the main cause now for
anti-semitic attacks nobody should
condone those anti-semitic attacks but I
think as Omar was saying uh when a state
behaves in a particular way and it
declares itself to be the state of the
Jews then this has a particular effect
on Jewish communities around the world
you could say that what most triggers
right now uh anti-Semitism around the
world is the conduct of the state of
through itself Stephanie we've seen
Jewish organizations at the Forefront of
the ceasefire movement are we seeing a
growing diversity of opinion uh within
the Jewish Community when it comes to
Israel I mean absolutely the the you
know protest movement that of the last
month speaks for itself we have
thousands and thousands of Jews of all
ages certainly young people of course
but of all ages pouring into the streets
where you know the movement um for
Palestinian rights and freedom Jews have
always been a part of we're and also
we've always been a part of so many
movements for for justice and freedom
and we bring all of that history with us
into this moment in which it feels like
um everything we've learned everything
we've um fought for all of our Lives
must be brought to bear to end these
historic atrocities that we're seeing
all right that's all we have time for I
want to thank you all for joining me om
Stephanie Omar thank you so much for
joining me it's great having a
conversation with you everybody that is
our show up front we'll be back next
we